---
title: "A novel multi-dimensional 'A rpiori' contact detection algorithm"
collection: publications
category: preprints
permalink: /publication/2025-CMAME-1
excerpt: 
date: 2025-03-07
venue: 'Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering'
paperurl: https://cea.hal.science/DAM/hal-04981784v1
doi: 
arxiv: 
citation: 'Sixtine Michel, Gael Poette, Nicolas Therme. A novel multi-dimensional a priori contact detection algorithm. 2025. ⟨hal-04981784⟩'
pdf: 
bib: /files/publications/bib/@unpublished{michel2025contact.bib
hal: https://cea.hal.science/DAM/hal-04981784v1
---

<!-- The contents above will be part of a list of publications, if the user clicks the link for the publication than the contents of section will be rendered as a full page, allowing you to provide more information about the paper for the reader. When publications are displayed as a single page, the contents of the above "citation" field will automatically be included below this section in a smaller font. -->


Abstract
=========
The accurate numerical simulation of moving bodies and interfaces requires robust contact detection algorithms, particularly in high-velocity impact scenarios involving elasto-plastic materials. Traditional contact detection methods, such as node-tosegment (NTS) techniques and neighbor-map approaches, exhibit limitations in both precision and computational efficiency: corrections are typically made after detecting material penetration a posteriori, disregarding the dynamics of the configuration. This paper presents a novel multi-dimensional contact detection algorithm based on the Continuous Extension of Thales' Theorem (CETT). The CETT algorithm enables precise determination of contact time and location across one-, two-, and three-dimensional problems. It achieves superior accuracy in a priori detection of interface interactions while maintaining computational efficiency, particularly for complex, unstructured meshes. While CETT establishes a new foundation for contact-impact algorithms, it can also be integrated into existing codes. We validate the algorithm through comprehensive numerical benchmarks, demonstrating its robustness and convergence properties in comparison to conventional approaches. The CETT method is fully compatible with both staggered and cell-centered finite volume schemes, making it well-suited for Lagrangian simulations and parallel implementations in industrial and scientific applications. 