---
title: "Fourier analysis of continuous FEM for hyperbolic PDEs : influence of approximation and stabilization terms."
collection: talks
type: "ICOSAHOM Conference (2020)"
permalink: /talks/2021-07-talk-1
venue: Vienna
date: 2021-07-14
location: "Austria"
---

<!-- This is a description of your talk, which is a markdown file that can be all markdown-ified like any other post. Yay markdown! -->
<!-- Reported in 2021 bcs of the covid -->

Abstract
=========
High order Continous Galerkin (CG) methods can be used to solve hyperbolic problems. However, it is well known that hyperbolic problems with a standard Finite Element Method (FEM) discretization show instabilities and there is the need of stabilization. The CG discretizations with stabilization techniques
can have dissipation levels that are comparable to the ones brought by Discontinuous Galerkin (DG) with upwind numerical ux of the same order of accuracy. The stabilization terms play an important role and we will compare two of them.
This work will compare di erent high order in time and space methods and their stability and dispersive analysis for one dimensional problems. For each considered method, we nd a von Neumann stability region, which depends on the CFL number and on the stabilization coe cient, and we test such
methods on some 1D and 2D numerical examples.
The high order methods that we consider are based on two continuous nite element discretizations and two di erent time methods. The nite element spaces are generated by di erent polynomial spaces.
We study Bernstein polynomials, Lagrangian polynomials in equispaced nodes and Lagrangian polynomials in cubature nodes. These latter are introduced by G. Cohen et al. in 2001 [7] to optimize the accuracy of quadrature rule. The choice of the quadrature rule is of crucial importance as it allows to
obtain a diagonal mass matrix and so decrease considerably the time of computation. In this work, we analyze the behaviour of the streamline-upwind Petrov-Galerkin (SUPG) stabilization technique [5, 2] and the continuous interior penalty (CIP) stabilization method [4, 6, 3], combined with high order time
schemes: strong stability preserving RK (SSPRK) and the deferred correction (DeC) time integration methods [1].
The aim of the fourier analysis is to obtain the best values for the CFL number and the stabilization coefficient to use also for other equations. Then, we conclude about the best combination of methods with numerical examples.

**Keywords:** Continuous Galerkin method, Spectral element method, Streamline Upwind Petrov Galerkin, Local Projection Stabilization, Continuous Interior Penalty, Dispersion analysis, cubature nodes, Deferred Correction scheme.

References
===========
    [1] R. Abgrall, High order schemes for hyperbolic problems using globally continos approximation and avoiding mass matrices, Journal of Scienti c Computing, 73 (2017).
    [2] E. Burman, Consistent supg-method for transient transport problems: Stability and convergence, Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering- COMPUT METHOD APPL MECHENG, 199 (2010), pp. 11141123.
    [3] E. Burman, A. Ern, and M. Fernandez, Explicit RungeKutta Schemes and Finite Elements with Symmetric Stabilization for First-Order Linear PDE Systems, SIAM Journal on Numerical Analysis, 48 (2010).
    [4] E. Burman and P. Hansbo, The edge stabilization method for nite elements in cfd, (2004).
    [5] E. Burman, A. Quarteroni, and B. Stamm, Stabilization strategies for high order methods for transport dominated problems, Bolletino dellUnione Matematica Italiana, 1 (2008).
    [6] E. Burman, A. Quarteroni, and B. Stamm, Interior penalty continuous and discontinuous nite element approximations of hyperbolic equations, Journal of Scientic Computing, 43 (2010), pp. 293312.
    [7] G. Cohen, P. Joly, J. Roberts, and N. Tordjman, Higher order triangular nite elements with mass lumping for the wave equation, Siam Journal on Numerical Analysis- SIAM J NUMER ANAL, 38 (2001).